Currently our demo is using an in-memory identity store with the
credentials hard- coded in the configuration class.
Let's persist the credentials in an identity store and create the
ability for users to register with the application.
Now for the purpose of the demo,
we can use an embedded H2 database as this makes running
the demo a lot simpler as you don't have to configure a
separate database and manage it.
Now Spring Boot makes this very simple.
Just by adding the H2 dependency to our POM file,
Spring automatically configures and starts the database on startup,
which is great for development.
And once you complete your development,
you can simply remove those dependencies and update the configuration file
with the connection details of the external database.
Now for the embedded database,
you can add a schema and data.sql file to your resources folder.
Spring Boot will detect these files and execute the schema and SQL
within them each time the application starts up,
setting up the database and populating it with test data.
Now we also need to update the application.yaml file with the following
details to configure the data source for the H2 database.
Now in order to get Spring Security to source the
credentials from the users table,
you just need to override the configure method that exposes
the AuthenticationManagerBuilder object.
You can then use the builder to instruct Spring Security that you
require JDBC authentication and pass in the datasource,
which you can autowire into the class.
Now Spring Security will do the rest.
And by default, it expects two database tables,
the users table with the fields username and password and the
authorities table with the fields username and authorities.
Now if your table names and field names are different,
you can specify the SQL required to return the username and password using the
usersByUsernameQuery and authoritiesByUsernameQuery methods.
And alternatively, you can programmatically configure all this,
instructing Spring to create the default tables it requires with the
withDefaultSchema method and populating the users,
which is very useful for development and testing.
That's it.
Spring Security will now retrieve the credentials for
authentication from these database tables.
Now Spring Security supports a multitude of identity stores from LDAP,
JDBC, you name it.
But if your one is not supported, you can create a custom UserDetailsService.
With Spring Boot,
all you need to do is create a class that implements the
UserDetailsService interface and annotate it with the Service tag.
You then override the loadUserByUsername method,
and here you can add the code to retrieve your
credentials from your identity store.
Now in this example,
we are connecting to MongoDB through a repository to
retrieve the users credentials.
If the username is not found, you need to throw a UsernameNotFoundException.
You can also use the User builder class to create the UserDetails
object required by the authentication manager.
We populate the Username and the Password with the roles.
And that's it.
Spring Boot will then detect and plug this
UserDetailsService into the authentication manager,
which will then use the UserDetailsService to retrieve the user credentials from MongoDB.